Enhancements to Security Getting Started docs (#27009)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/security-getting-started.adoc

and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////

> = Secure a Quarkus application with basic authentication and JPA

Author: Hello @sberyozkin, @ebullient and @gsmet,

I completed an initial review and applied edits based on some of the style priorities that we discussed as being potential areas to focus on for the Quarkus developer docs. 

Apologies there's a lot in this PR. For future iterations, I'll submit smaller chunks as per the process discussion of late.

Many thanks :-) 
Michelle

> = Secure a Quarkus application with basic authentication and JPA

Author: Hello @sberyozkin,
Regarding the title discussion and comments from the last draft PR...

While the content helps you to get started, the more I read through the content, I felt that this topic was more of a tutorial quick start which explains how to secure a Quarkus application with basic authentication and JPA.
I thought that the content was a really great quick start tutorial for a learner more so than a Getting started guide.

I also wondered whether the 'Security Architecture and Guides' topic was a better fit for the Getting Started with Quarkus security guide. What do you think?

Reviewer: Hi @michelle-purcell I'd like to retain a message here somehow that it is the first step for those new to security and to Quarkus security in particular to Get Started with Quarkus Security. This is why I'm not sure this title should be renamed since immediately in the following paragraph we say that here you can learn how to get stared with quarkus security quickly with basic authentication and JPA.
So I'd either keep `Getting Started wuth Quarkus Security` or may be tweak it a bit, example `Get Started with Quarkus Security using Basic Authentication` by not really highlighting `JPA` as Stuart had some concerns highlighting it too much until we get a reactive JPA support. JPA is really an implementation aspect of how to configure Quarkus with the user names/roles.

Can we agree on `Get Started with Quarkus Security using Basic Authentication` ?

>I also wondered whether the 'Security Architecture and Guides' topic was a better fit for the Getting Started with Quarkus security guide. What do you think?

IMHO 'Security Architecture and Guides'  should remain a document which briefly introduces everything related to Quarkus Security and links to the concrete documents expanding a given concept further

Author: @sberyozkin 

Thanks Sergey.

+1 to  **Get Started with Quarkus Security using Basic Authentication**. 

One question:

Both the Google and Red Hat style guidelines for headings prefer sentence case capitalization:

_In sentence-style, capitalize only the initial letter of the first word in the text and other words that require capitalization, such as proper nouns (product names)._

Are the following terms proper nouns in this context, i.e actual names of products/services/code/components products within Quarkus?
 
Quarkus Security 
Basic Authentication

If not, then I'd suggest that here and elsewhere we use lower case, for example:

**Get Started with security in Quarkus by using basic authentication**.

Reviewer: Hi @michelle-purcell thanks, please change the title a bit more if you'd like, but yeah if we can retain a message somehow that it is about getting started then it would be not bad IMHO.

To me `Basic Authentication` is a recognizable concept, which is what the capitalization highlights, for example, `BA` is one acronym for it which is what Michal Maler found as well. So I'd prefer this particular approach here, as for example, once we move to OIDC, something like "oidc authentication" or "openid connect authentication" would not read well :-)
 
Perhaps, in such a title, it can be `Basic authentication` or in OIDC, `OpenId Connect`/`OIDC` `authentication`, may be it is a better approach, keep the authentication method capitalized such as `Basic` but the `authentication` itself - lower case...

Author: @sberyozkin Thank you Sergey for this context and information. It's really helpful.

I changed it to:

Get started with security in Quarkus by using Basic authentication

We are also discussing this amongst the team for consistency.

Author: @sberyozkin (cc @ebullient , @inoxx03 @gsmet ) 

After a bit more discussion on this...

For consistency, unless the 'Basic' bit of the phrase here is a proper noun (i.e a library name, command name, code name, product name, service name) grammatically it would make sense to use all lower case, as per the example below.

If we want to use the initialism (short form), we can do too. If an initialism/abbreviation is not commonly known, or if you are unsure whether it is commonly known, it is good practice to spell out the term at its first occurrence in the text body followed by the abbreviation in parentheses.

Therefore, to be consistent, could we consider using:

**Long:** basic authentication 
**Short:** BA
**First reference:**  basic authentication (BA)

Also, regarding your point about OIDC authentication, the first bit is a proper noun, so we can use uppercase as per the official standard/product. 

**Long:**  OpenID Connect authentication
**Shorter:** OIDC authentication
**Short:** OIDCA (ONLY use if this initialism does not duplicate an existing brand/trademark or commonly used technology standard in the industry/discipline of the content)
**First reference:** OpenID Connect authentication (OIDCA) 

What do you think?

> 

Author: @sberyozkin - After a discussion with Erin, we agreed that this title nicely follows the Diataxis and preferred Quarkus doc style.

@ebullient - Note that I removed the 'and JPA' bit in my originally suggested title to incorporate Siarhei's previous comment about JPA.

:categories: get-started

> :toc: preamble

Reviewer 2: I hate to do this to you... but I think we've decided we can remove this (I'll handle it in the included attributes)

Author: Lines 8 and 9 removed.

> To help you get started with security in Quarkus, this tutorial demonstrates how you can further secure your Quarkus application endpoints by combining the xref:security-built-in-authentication.adoc#basic-auth[Quarkus built-in basic HTTP authentication] with the JPA identity provider.

Reviewer: I think we should drop `further` here

Author: +1 Done!

> `IdentityProvider` verifies the authentication credentials to create a `SecurityIdentity` instance and authorizes a secure connection to the endpoint by using Role Based Access Control (RBAC). 

Reviewer: It reads good, but `and authorizes a secure connection to the endpoint` can confuse users - as a secure connection is often associated with `HTTPS` but not with a specific authentication mechanism. Besides we also have an `MTLS` authentication mechanism.
So IMHO we should say `and authorizes a secure access to the endpoint`

Author: +1. Removed the article 'a' as per grammar rules. But if this changes the accuracy we can rephrase as needed.

The JPA `IdentityProvider` creates a `SecurityIdentity` instance, which is used during user authentication to verify and authorize access requests making your Quarkus application secure.

> After you complete this tutorial, you will be ready to apply more advanced security mechanisms in Quarkus, for example, how to use the OpenID Connect (OIDC) authentication mechanism.

Author: Or, what about...
This tutorial prepares you for implementing more advanced security mechanisms in Quarkus, for example, how to use the OpenID Connect (OIDC) authentication mechanism.

====

> After you have completed this tutorial, you will be ready to apply more advanced security mechanisms in Quarkus, for example, use the `OpenID Connect` authentication mechanism.

Author: Should we move prereqs section to immediately before the sequential steps begin? 

As a new Quarkus developer, I'm thinking I'd like to know what I will acheieve (be building) before I get into prereqs, unless the prereqs are extremely significanthere.

> After you have completed this tutorial, you will be ready to apply more advanced security mechanisms in Quarkus, for example, how to use the `OpenID Connect` authentication mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you have completed this tutorial, you will be ready to apply more advanced security mechanisms in Quarkus, for example, use the `OpenID Connect` authentication mechanism.
```

|`/api/public`| The `/api/public` endpoint can be accessed anonymously.
|`/api/users/me`|The `/api/admin` endpoint is protected with role-based access control (RBAC), and only users who have been granted the `admin` role can access it. 
At this endpoint, the `@RolesAllowed` annotation is used to declaratively enforce the access constraint.
| `/api/admin`| The `/api/users/me` endpoint is protected with RBAC and only users that have been granted the `user` role can access it. A JSON document with details about the user is returned as a response.
|===

[TIP]
====
If you just want to examine the code, you can fast-forward to the completed example by using one of the following ways:

* Download the {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive]
* Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}`

You can find the solution in the `security-jpa-quickstart` {quickstarts-tree-url}/security-jpa-quickstart[directory].
====

:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 3

== Create a Maven project with the `security-jpa` extension

For Quarkus security to be able to map your security source to JPA entities, ensure that the Maven project that is used in this tutorial includes the `security-jpa` extension.

> You can either create a new Maven project with the `security-jpa` extension or you can add the extension to an existing Maven project.

Reviewer 2: Now I'm thinking about this (why I didn't think about this the first 6 times I read it.. 🙄) .. should we be simplifying here? Tutorial is a single path. Should we just state flat out: create a new project? (then we can skip the add extension to existing project.. variant.. )

Author: FIxed: Heading simplified.

== Create a Maven project with the `security-jpa` extension

For Quarkus security to be able to map your security source to JPA entities, ensure that the Maven project that is used in this tutorial includes the `security-jpa` extension.
You can either create a new Maven project with the `security-jpa` extension or you can add the extension to an existing Maven project.

* To create the Maven project, use the following command:

:create-app-artifact-id: security-jpa-quickstart
:create-app-extensions: security-jpa,jdbc-postgresql,resteasy-reactive,hibernate-orm-panache
include::{includes}/devtools/create-app.adoc[]
[NOTE]
====
xref:hibernate-orm-panache.adoc[Hibernate ORM with Panache] is used to store your user identities but you can also use xref:hibernate-orm.adoc[Hibernate ORM].
You must also add your preferred database connector library.
The instructions in this example tutorial use a PostgreSQL database for the identity store.
====
* To add the `security-jpa` extension to an existing Maven project, run the following command from your project base directory:

:add-extension-extensions: security-jpa
include::{includes}/devtools/extension-add.adoc[]

=== Verification

> When you run either command, the following XML is added to your build file:

Author: I added 'either command' here to the original line 69. Is this correct?

I wasn't quite sure if the verification information applied to a) creating a new Maven project with security-jpa` extension AND  b) Adding security-jpa` extension to an existing Maven, or just the latter.

Reviewer: `either` should be fine, thanks

and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////

> = Secure a Quarkus application with basic authentication

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Secure a Quarkus application with Basic authentication
```

Reviewer: `Basic` authentication is a well known concept, so while it may not match Red Hat guidelines, IMHO we need to retain a capital `B`

Author: Thanks, @sberyozkin - Apologies for more churn on this!

If the content is specifically referring to the HTTP RFC specification for the 'Basic' authentication scheme (https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7617.txt), as I think it is here, then I totally agree.  I will follow up with Red Hat style guidelines to get this variation and clarification added to our style guide.
 
For other references, if the content is more generally referring to basic authentication as a common operation that does not formulate a unique product or feature identity, it does not deserve proper noun treatment and lowercase '_basic authentication_' is more appropriate, as per Red Hat guidelines and what we see commonly used in other non-Red Hat docs.

(CC-ing FYI: @inoxx03,  @sheilamjones, @hmanwani-rh, @MichalMaler )

include::./attributes.adoc[]
:categories: get-started
:toc: preamble

Secure your Quarkus application endpoints by combining the xref:security-built-in-authentication.adoc#basic-auth[Quarkus built-in basic HTTP authentication] with the JPA identity provider to enable role-based access control (RBAC). 

> The JPA `IdentityProvider` creates a `SecurityIdentity` instance, which is used during user authentication to verify and authorize access requests making your Quarkus application more secure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The JPA `IdentityProvider` creates a `SecurityIdentity` instance, which is used during user authentication to verify and authorize access requests making your Quarkus application secure.
```

Reviewer: Just a tiny update proposal here, as Quarkus security is expected to provide a 100% security guarantee, as far as meeting some specific security constraints are concerned

After you complete this tutorial, you will be ready to apply more advanced security mechanisms in Quarkus, for example, how to use the OpenID Connect (OIDC) authentication mechanism.

== Prerequisites

include::{includes}/prerequisites.adoc[]

== What you will build

> If you complete all of the steps in this tutorial, you will build a microservice that provides the following endpoints:

Author: I agree. Fixed with a bit of tweaking.

|===
|Endpoint | Description 
|`/api/public`| The `/api/public` endpoint can be accessed anonymously.
|`/api/users/me`|The `/api/admin` endpoint is protected with role-based access control (RBAC), and only users who have been granted the `admin` role can access it. 
At this endpoint, the `@RolesAllowed` annotation is used to declaratively enforce the access constraint.
| `/api/admin`| The `/api/users/me` endpoint is protected with RBAC and only users that have been granted the `user` role can access it. A JSON document with details about the user is returned as a response.
|===

== How to complete this tutorial

You can start from scratch and complete each of the numbered steps in sequence or you can bypass the basic setup steps that are already familiar to you:

* To start from scratch, go to *Create a Maven project with the `security-jpa` extension*.

* To skip the basics and go straight to the end solution, either:
** Clone the Git repository: `git clone {quickstarts-clone-url}`
** Download the {quickstarts-archive-url}[archive]
[TIP]
====
The solution is located in the `security-jpa-quickstart` {quickstarts-tree-url}/security-jpa-quickstart[directory].
====

> 

Reviewer: Interesting idea, I guess it would need to be applied across the board, though may be we can indeed start doing it from this doc :-)

> 

Author: +1 to this idea. It fits nicely into the end of the previous section (== What you will build).

}
----

The application is now protected and the user identities are provided by the specified database.

[NOTE]
====
In a production environment, do not store plain text passwords.
As a result, the `security-jpa` defaults to using bcrypt-hashed passwords.
====

== Test your application

> === Test your application by using Dev Services for PostgreSQL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Use Dev Services for PostgreSQL to test your application
```

Given this is just below the `Test your application` heading, seems like we can still be direct and highlight what is unique about this section

Author: We ususally would frown upon 'use' or 'using' as the first word verb in an action heading as they can be ambiguous and too broad.

But... as you rightly point out, this heading is directly under the Test your application, so I think that's fine in this case, unless it doesn't cause problems for the other children (===) in this section that should be in parallel.

user%
----

:sectnums!:

> == JPA security information 

Reviewer 2: @sberyozkin .. does this belong in this tutorial, or should it be somewhere else (howto)? feels out of place in this tutorial.

Reviewer: @ebullient Right, originally this document was a `security-jpa.adoc`, quickstart + reference, before it was refactored into a Getting Started with Quarkus Sec. So I guess this JPA security information is a reference part specific to JPA only and should eventually be moved to `security-jpa-reference.adoc` (probably makes sense to do it in the next step)

Reviewer: @michelle-purcell Hi Michelle, `JPA security information`  changes the original meaning of `Security JPA Reference Guide`. This is a reference part related to the `security-jpa` extension which is located in this doc because the original doc was all about `security-jpa`. Please retain the original title and then we'll move it to its own ref/etc doc and name accordingly.

Author: @ebullient & @sberyozkin - I added a reminder to move this section later in a hidden comment.

> == JPA security information 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Security JPA Reference Guide
```

Reviewer 2: @sberyozkin .. guidance for titles is here: https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/blob/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc/doc-reference.adoc#titles-and-headings

Reviewer: Hi @michelle-purcell This is perfect, thank you :-)
